Mental disorders among children are described as serious changes in the way children typically learn, behave, or handle their emotions, causing distress and problems getting through the day. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), behavior problems, anxiety, and depression are the most commonly diagnosed mental disorders in children.

The percent of children aged 6–17 ever having been diagnosed with either anxiety or depression has increased from 5.4% in 2003 to 8% in 2007 and to 8.4% in 2011–2012.^[1]

Children with untreated mental illness are more likely to fail school, interface with juvenile justice, engage in high risk health behaviors, and have poor health as adults.

Children who experience more adverse childhood experiences (ACEs), such as those who live with abuse, neglect, a parent with mental illness, parent with addiction, or domestic violence, are more likely to develop mental illness in adulthood. Studies have found poor outcomes associated with individual ACEs, and one recent study found having 4 or more ACEs was associated with poor mental health outcomes, poor physical health outcomes, and unhealthy behaviors.^[2] At 19.9 percent, Texas ranks 18th in the nation for the percentage of children ages 0-17 who experienced two or more of a select set of ACEs.

<span style="font-size:12px; line-height:1.1 !important">^[1]: Bitsko, et al. Epidemiology and Impact of Health Care Provider–Diagnosed Anxiety and Depression Among US Children, Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics: June 2018 - Volume 39 - Issue 5 - p 395-403 doi: 10.1097/DBP.0000000000000571
<span style="font-size:12px; line-height:1.1 !important">^[2]: Hughes, Karen, et al. “The Effect of Multiple Adverse Childhood Experiences on Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” The Lancet Public Health, vol. 2, no. 8, 2017, pp. e356–66, doi:10.1016/s2468-2667(17)30118-4.