COVID-19 has highlighted many of the challenges in the structure of the U.S. health system both in Texas and nationwide. It also has worsened underlying health disparities based on socioeconomic factors. For example, those with less educational attainment may be more likely to hold jobs that do not have paid sick leave or work-from-home options or do not have employer-sponsored health coverage. People with lower incomes are less likely to miss work when they are sick because they are living paycheck to paycheck to meet basic needs. People who have lost their jobs are less likely to have access to affordable health insurance.

America’s Health Rankings compares COVID-19 risk factors by state. One means of comparison is an [Economic Hardship Index](https://www.americashealthrankings.org/explore/annual/measure/EHI), which is a composite measure comparing states on six measures of unemployment, dependency, education, income, crowded housing and poverty. Texas ranks 43rd in the nation on the Economic Hardship measure, and is the lowest ranking state among the Texas 2036 peer states.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) produces a [Social Vulnerability Index (SVI)](https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/placeandhealth/svi/index.html) for each county that is intended to help local officials identify communities that may need support before, during, or after disasters. The SVI is based on U.S. Census Data on 15 social and economic factors, like poverty, household composition, educational attainment, and crowded housing. Higher SVI rates in many cases correlate with higher COVID-19 death rates, as the social factors included in the index have historically corresponded with poorer health outcomes.
