Among Texans age 65 and older, 8.7% reported their mental health was not good 14 or more days in the past 30 days. This ranked Texas seniors at 38th in the nation on this measure of frequent mental distress and 11th among Texas 2036 peer states. 

Frequent mental distress is a measure based on self-reported days in which mental health was not good, including stress, depression, and problems with emotions. The measure, and associated 14-day cutoff point, aims to capture the population with possible clinical markers for depression and anxiety disorders. People with more poor mental health days also have a comparatively higher adverse impact of their mental health on their usual daily activities, such as engaging in self-care, work, and recreation.^[1]

Mental well-being is an integral part of quality of life and can influence other health behaviors. However, mental health issues may be more difficult to identify in older adults as people assume feelings of sadness and anxiety are interrelated to loss of loved ones, emergence of chronic illness, or other factors associated with aging. Among the most extreme cases, undiagnosed mental health issues can lead to suicide. Males over the age of 75 have the highest suicide rate, at 39.9 deaths per 100,000 population in 2018.^[2]  

<span style="font-size:12px; line-height:1.1 !important">^[1]: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Self-reported frequent mental distress among adults--United States, 1993-1996. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 1998 May 1;47(16):325-331. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00052469.html

<span style="font-size:12px; line-height:1.1 !important">^[2]: Hedegaard H, Curtin SC, Warner M. Increase in suicide mortality in the United States, 1999–2018. NCHS Data Brief, no 362. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2020.  https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db362-h.pdf. Accessed 4 Oct 2020. 